  BIP: XXX
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Octojoin v1
  Author: /dev/fd0 <alicexbt@protonmail.com>
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0xxx
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2024-09-25
  License: BSD-2-Clause


==Abstract==

This document describes the process to use swapped UTXOs for inputs, [[bip-0352.mediawiki|BIP 352]] silent payment addresses for outputs, and hide the transacted amount with multiple interpretations.

==Motivation==

Payjoin requires coordination and sharing of UTXOs between sender and recipient. This affects privacy and UX in some cases. Octojoin avoids sharing of UTXOs and uses swapped UTXOs along with other inputs from wallet in the transaction. 
This reduces coordination and there is no need for recipient to share their UTXOs. Users can still achieve same level of privacy and the transaction looks normal on-chain.

====Relation to Monero====

Most Monero transactions use 16 ring size for the input, making it impossible to determine which input is signed by the user out of 16. The amounts are hidden, and stealth addresses are used for outputs.

Octojoin achieves partial obfuscation similar to Monero's ring signatures ([https://www.getmonero.org/2024/04/27/fcmps.html FCMP++] will replace ring signatures in the future) and stealth addresses. Swaps can be done off-chain to obscure the transaction's input ownership and history.

==Specification==

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY" and "RECOMMENDED" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

====Sequence Diagram====

<source lang="mermaid">
sequenceDiagram
    participant Alice
    participant Wallet
    participant Bob

    Alice->>Wallet: Label swapped UTXOs as 'octojoin'
    Bob->>Alice: Share silent payment address
    Alice->>Wallet: Create transaction using 'octojoin' UTXOs + 1 normal input
    Note right of Alice: Minimum 2 outputs and avoid change for multiple interpretations
    Wallet->>Bob: Pay Bob
</source>

Users should label some UTXOs as “octojoin” so that they can be used in octojoin transactions. Ideally, these UTXOs should be ones that have been swapped with others and are linked to someone else’s transaction history.

'''Input Obfuscation with Off-Chain Swaps'''

Do off-chain swaps (e.g. statechain, submarine swaps, or coinswap) to obtain UTXOs with different histories. Ensure that all inputs come from other users except one belonging to the sender, making it difficult for on-chain analysts to determine ownership.

'''Outputs'''

Silent payment ([[bip-0352.mediawiki|BIP 352]]) addresses are RECOMMENDED for the outputs: the sender derives a fresh, unlinkable output address for each denomination with no interaction from the recipient. Implementations MAY instead accept multiple plain recipient addresses, but each MUST be a fresh address that is not otherwise linkable to the recipient; reusing or linking those addresses defeats the unlinkability that silent payments provide automatically.

'''Multiple Outputs and Different Interpretations'''

The transaction includes multiple outputs, which may include change to the sender, hiding the payment amount.

An algorithm requiring some values from the user to create the transaction or notify the user about missing inputs will be implemented by different wallets:

* Payment amount
* Number of inputs (default: 3)
* Number of outputs (default: 2)
* Equal amounts in inputs (default: false)

''Equal amounts in inputs'' controls whether the selected inputs are constrained to equal (or near-equal) values, mimicking the uniform inputs of a coinjoin. It defaults to false because, outside a coordinated equal-value coinjoin, equal-valued inputs are themselves a fingerprint; varied input amounts blend better with ordinary transactions.

Analysis of different decoy selection algorithms used in Monero: https://github.com/monero-project/research-lab/issues/99

Input selection is important in Octojoin, although not the same as decoy selection used in different Monero wallets. Recommendations for Octojoin algorithms:

Transaction MUST have at least 3 inputs, all swapped except one. It SHOULD avoid mixed input types and use random wallet fingerprints, including BIP 69. It SHOULD use inputs of similar age. Some inputs SHOULD be recent UTXOs. All outputs, including the change output, MUST use the same script type; when silent payment outputs are used (P2TR) the change output MUST also be P2TR.

====Decomposition of Amounts====

To hide the payment value it is split into standard denominations so that no single output reveals the amount being sent. Implementations use the following denominations, in BTC:

 1.0, 0.5, 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.002, 0.001   (100000000 ... 100000 sat)

The amount is decomposed greedily:

# For each denomination from largest to smallest, while it is less than or equal to the remaining amount, emit it as an output value and subtract it from the remaining amount.
# Distribute the resulting denominations across the requested number of outputs (default 2) round-robin. For a silent payment recipient each output is a fresh address derived from the recipient's silent payment code (BIP 352), and the denominations are grouped round-robin into the requested number of outputs.

'''Value conservation'''

The sum of the output denominations MUST equal the payment amount. The dust threshold referenced below is the minimum non-dust value for the output script type and fee rate (for example 294 sat for P2WPKH and 330 sat for P2TR at typical fee rates), not a fixed constant. If a remainder is left after the greedy step:

* a remainder above the dust threshold MAY be emitted as its own output;
* a remainder at or below the dust threshold MUST be folded into one of the existing denomination outputs, never dropped.

Dropping a sub-dust remainder silently donates it to the miner fee and underpays the recipient, and MUST be avoided. A payment that does not exceed the dust threshold cannot be decomposed into a valid output and MUST be rejected.

Examples:

 0.003 BTC  -> [0.002, 0.001]           (exact sum of denominations)
 0.0015 BTC -> [0.001, 0.0005]          (0.0005 is a non-round remainder output)
 0.008 BTC  -> [0.005, 0.002, 0.001]    (exact sum of denominations)

Most payment amounts are not an exact sum of standard denominations, so the value below the smallest denomination (0.001) is emitted as a non-round output (the 0.0005 above), and round-robin distribution can sum denominations into non-round per-output amounts (e.g. 0.0035 -> 0.0025 + 0.001). This is expected and desirable: outputs that are always exact round denominations would themselves fingerprint the transaction, whereas non-round outputs let it blend with ordinary payments. Implementations MUST NOT pad or round the payment amount to force round outputs.

====Input Selection and the Unnecessary Input Heuristic====

The unnecessary input heuristic (UIH) flags a transaction that contains more input value than required to fund its non-change outputs: if any single input can be removed while the remaining inputs still cover the payment plus fee, that input is "unnecessary". Ordinary wallets avoid this through coin selection, so an unnecessary input is a fingerprint that the transaction is not a simple payment.

Because Octojoin deliberately adds swapped inputs, naive selection can trip this heuristic. Implementations SHOULD size and select inputs so that no input is unnecessary. For n inputs funding a payment P with fee F:

 (sum of all inputs) - min(inputs) < P + F

so that dropping any single input leaves the transaction underfunded, making it indistinguishable from an ordinary transaction that combines several small coins.

A changeless transaction is the strongest result: when the inputs sum to P + F there is no change output to identify and no unnecessary input. In practice an exact P + F match is rarely achievable from discrete UTXOs, so a UIH-clean change output (smaller than every input, as above) is the practical target. Where change is present, it SHOULD be indistinguishable from the payment outputs, with a similar magnitude and the same script type, rather than a round denomination; a small or odd-valued change output that stands apart from the payment outputs reveals itself as change.

====Fee Estimation====

The fee is derived from the virtual size of the constructed transaction:

 fee = ceil(vsize * feeRate)

where vsize is estimated as overhead + (numInputs * input vbytes) + (numOutputs * output vbytes), and numOutputs includes the change output when one is present. The exact per-input and per-output vbyte constants depend on the script type and are implementation specific.

==Rationale==

====Default Values====

We need at least 1 normal input in the transaction, so 2 swapped inputs will provide minimum privacy in a transaction. 1 output will reveal the payment amount, at least 2 outputs are required for multiple interpretations.

Total transactions with 3 inputs (~43,000,000): https://blockchair.com/bitcoin/transactions?s=time(desc)&q=input_count(3)#f=hash,input_count,time

Total transaction with 3 inputs and 2 outputs (~27,000,000): https://blockchair.com/bitcoin/transactions?s=time(desc)&q=input_count(3),output_count(2)#f=hash,input_count,time,output_count

<source lang="mermaid">
xychart-beta
    title "Transactions with 3 inputs and 2 outputs"
    x-axis [Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep]
    y-axis "Transactions (in thousands)" 0 --> 160 
    bar [125, 143, 157, 130, 117, 106, 121, 123, 127]
</source>

Transactions that already use 3 inputs and 2 outputs will serve as the anonymity set for octojoin transactions with default values. It is possible to change defaults and use a higher number of inputs and outputs.

====Swapped UTXOs====

Swapping UTXOs off-chain will obscure the transaction's input ownership and history. It also adds more noise on-chain to make chain analysis difficult.

====Silent Payment Addresses====

A sender may require more than 1 output, so silent payment addresses are the best approach to generate new addresses with no interaction and maximum privacy.

==Implementation==

Proof of Concept: https://github.com/octojoin/poc

==Backwards Compatibility==

This is a new protocol and has no compatibility issues. It RECOMMENDS [[bip-0352.mediawiki|BIP 352]] silent payments for the outputs, but it can also be used with multiple fresh, unlinked recipient addresses. It is not a replacement for payjoin (BIP 77 and BIP 78) and benefits from multiple interpretations on-chain.

==Attack Vectors==

* Metadata leak in swaps
* User not careful while spending outputs created in Octojoin transaction

==Acknowledgement==

I would like to thank nothingmuch for the review and everyone who donated in the geyser [https://geyser.fund/project/octojoin crowdfunding campaign].
